---
layout: default
title: K-Means
parent: Clustering
grand_parent: Unsupervised Learning
nav_order: "1"

---
# K means	(Non-Hierarchical)

It is based on the division of objects into non-overlapping subsets. The main objective is to form clusters that are homogeneous in nature and heterogeneous to each other.

ℹ Only for continuous variables.

 

**Advantages:**

* Faster, more reliable, works with large data.
* Computationally lighter than other methods

**Disadvantages:**

* Can only identify clusters circular / spherical in nature. (check crescent dataset)
* Distance based

 

**Process :**

1. Identify value of ‘k’
2. Assign random k observations as seeds
3. Assign each record to one of the k seeds based on proximity
4. Form clusters
5. Calculate centroids of clusters
6. Assign centroids as new seed
7. Form new clusters
8. Recalculate clusters
9. Continue process until stable clusters are formed (boundary ceases to change)

 

**Elbow Criterion (Scree Plot):**

K means clustering doesn't provide an estimate of the number of clusters required. Hence elbow criterion is used to determine the optimal number of clusters.

The method says that you should choose a number of clusters so that adding another cluster does not add any sufficient information. It is plotted by the ratio of within cluster variance to between cluster variance against number of clusters. The objective is to minimise the within and maximise the between distances.

**Validation :**

R squared : R2 = Between sum of squares  / total sum of squares Pseudo f Clc Silhouette pc plot ccc cluster criterion